changes to episode 3, tasks 9-23 (#137)
carpentries-incubator/high-dimensional-stats-r: _episodes_rmd/03-regression-regularisation.Rmd

# as.data.frame() converts train_mat into a data.frame
# Using the `.` syntax above together with a `data` argument will lead to
# the same result as using `train_age ~ train_mat`: R will fit a multivariate 
# regression model in which each of the columns in `train_mat` is used as 
# a predictor. We opted to use the `.` syntax because it will help us to 
# obtain model predictions using the `predict()` function. 

fit_horvath <- lm(train_age ~ ., data = as.data.frame(train_mat))

## Function to calculate the (mean squared) error
 mse <- function(true, prediction) { 
     mean((true - prediction)^2) 
 } 

## Calculate the training error 
err_lm_train <- mse(train_age, fitted(fit_horvath)) 
err_lm_train
```

The training error appears very low here -- on average we're only off by 
about a year! 

> ## Challenge 3
> 
> For the fitted model above, calculate the mean squared error for the test set. 
>
> 
> > ## Solution
> >
> > First, let's find the predicted values for the 'unseen' test data:
> > ```{r modelpreds}
> > pred_lm <- predict(fit_horvath, newdata = as.data.frame(test_mat)) 
> > ```
> > 
> > The mean squared error for the test set is the mean of the squared 

> > > error of the predicted values and true test data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > error between the predicted values and true test data.
```
?

## Generate an index to split the data
set.seed(42)
train_ind <- sample(nrow(methyl_mat), 25)

## Split the data 
train_mat <- horvath_mat[train_ind, ]
train_age <- age[train_ind]
test_mat <- horvath_mat[-train_ind, ]
test_age <- age[-train_ind]

```

Now let's fit a linear model to our training data and calculate the training error. Here we use the mean of the squared difference between our predictions and the observed data, or "mean squared error" (MSE).

```{r trainlm}
## Fit a linear model
# as.data.frame() converts train_mat into a data.frame

> #Using the `.` syntax above together with a `data` argument will lead to
> #the same result as using `train_age ~ train_mat`: R will fit a multivariate 
> #regression model in which each of the columns in `train_mat` is used as 
> #a predictor. We opted to use the `.` syntax because it will help us to 
> #obtain model predictions using the `predict()` function. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Using the `.` syntax above together with a `data` argument will lead to
# the same result as using `train_age ~ train_mat`: R will fit a multivariate 
# regression model in which each of the columns in `train_mat` is used as 
# a predictor. We opted to use the `.` syntax because it will help us to 
# obtain model predictions using the `predict()` function. 
```

This is just a style thing for me, probably doesn't bother anybody else!

weight to another feature that represents similar information.

Since we split the data into test and training data, we can prove that ridge
regression gives us a better prediction compared to the model with no regularisation. 
Let's generate our predictions under the ridge regression model and calculate
the mean squared error in the test set:

```{r pred-ridge-lm, fig.width = 10, fig.cap="Cap", fig.alt="Alt"}

> ##Predict using the ridge model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Predict using the ridge model
```

> pred_ridge <- predict(ridge_fit, newx = test_mat)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# obtain a prediction matrix, where every column corresponds to a different lambda value
pred_ridge <- predict(ridge_fit, newx = test_mat)
```

> ##Calculate MSE

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Calculate MSE for every column of the prediction matrix against the vector of true ages
```

err_ridge <- apply(pred_ridge, 2, function(col) mse(test_age, col)) 
min_err_ridge <- min(err_ridge)

> ##Save some results for later analysis 

Reviewer 2: # identify the lowest MSE value out of all of the columns of the prediction matrix

Reviewer: Made a minor edit to Alan's... same principle.

weight to another feature that represents similar information.

Since we split the data into test and training data, we can prove that ridge

> regression gives us a better prediction compared to the model with no regularisation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regression predicts the test data better than the model with no regularisation. 
```

Author: Agreed - this is so much clearer

Let's generate our predictions under the ridge regression model and calculate
the mean squared error in the test set:

```{r pred-ridge-lm, fig.width = 10, fig.cap="Cap", fig.alt="Alt"}

> # obtain a matrix of predictions from the ridge model,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Obtain a matrix of predictions from the ridge model,
```

# where each column corresponds to a different lambda value
pred_ridge <- predict(ridge_fit, newx = test_mat)

# Calculate MSE for every column of the prediction matrix against the vector of true ages
err_ridge <- apply(pred_ridge, 2, function(col) mse(test_age, col)) 
min_err_ridge <- min(err_ridge)

##Save some results for later analysis 
which_min_err <- which.min(err_ridge)
pred_min_ridge <- pred_ridge[, which_min_err]

> ##Return errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Return errors
```

min_err_ridge
```

This is much lower than the test error for the model without regularisation:

```{r pred-ridge-lm-noreg}
err_lm  
```

We can see where on the continuum of lambdas we've picked a model by plotting
the coefficient paths again. In this case, we've picked a model with fairly

> modest shrinkage.

Reviewer: Have we defined shrinkage? We did previously but I think that this might have been lost?

Author: "Shrinkage" isn't used but the episode refers to "shrinking of the coefficients" further up. Have changed "modest shrinkage" to "modest coefficient shrinking" in 96e6721

Author: Would you prefer shrinkage to be defined somewhere?

Reviewer: No I think this is fine.

we don't want the value of $\lambda$ to be so large that we lose a lot of the valuable information in the features.

Various methods can be used to balance this trade-off and thus select the "best"
value for $\lambda$. One method splits
the data into $K$ chunks. We then use $K-1$ of
these as the training set, and the remaining $1$ chunk
as the test set. We can repeat this until we've rotated through all $K$ chunks,
giving us a good estimate of how well each of the lambda values work in our
data. This is called cross-validation, and doing this repeated test/train split
gives us a better estimate of how generalisable our model is. 

```{r cvfig, echo = FALSE, fig.cap = "Schematic representiation of a $K$-fold cross-validation procedure.", fig.alt = "The data is divided into $K$ chunks. For each cross-validation iteration, one data chunk is used as the test set. The remaining $K-1$ chunks are combined into a training set."}
knitr::include_graphics("../fig/cross_validation.png")
```

We can use this new idea to choose a lambda value by finding the lambda
that minimises the error across each of the test and training splits. In R:

> ```{r lasso-cv, fig.cap="Cross-validated mean squared error for different values of lambda under a LASSO penalty.", fig.alt="Alt"}

Reviewer 2: ``{r lasso-cv, fig.cap="Cross-validated mean squared error for different values of lambda under a LASSO penalty.", fig.alt="Mean squared error (with confidence interval) for a range of different lambda values. Mean squared error values are shown as red dots, with black error bars on the y-axis corresponding to the corresponding confidence intervals."}

Author: ```suggestion
```{r lasso-cv, fig.cap="Cross-validated mean squared error for different values of lambda under a LASSO penalty.", fig.alt="Mean squared error (with confidence intervals) for a range of different lambda values. Mean squared error values are shown as red dots, with black error bars on the y-axis showing the corresponding confidence intervals."}
```

Author: added plural 'confidence intervals' for first mention and corresponding-> showing in the second sentence

Reviewer: Looks good!

> ##Fit lasso

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# fit lasso model with cross-validation across a range of lambda values
```

lasso <- cv.glmnet(methyl_mat[, -1], age, alpha = 1)
plot(lasso)

> ##Extract the coefficients and return those that are non-zero

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Extract the coefficients corresponding to the lowest mean squared error from cross-validation
```

> ##Extract the coefficients and return those that are non-zero

Reviewer: Alternate suggestion to Alan's above...

```suggestion
# Extract the coefficients from the model with the lowest mean squared error from cross-validation
```

Author: Changed in [f20b2ec](https://github.com/mallewellyn/high-dimensional-stats-r/commit/f20b2eca66b2d20d4e9d2438bdba61f5c9f506b3)

coefl <- coef(lasso, lasso$lambda.min)

> selected_coefs <- as.matrix(coefl)[which(coefl != 0), 1] ; selected_coefs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# select only non-zero coefficients
selection <- which(coefl != 0)
# and convert to a normal matrix
selected_coefs <- as.matrix(coefl)[selection, 1]
selected_coefs
```

Author: This is so much nicer!

```

> We can see that cross-validation has selected a value of $\lambda$ resulting in `r length(selected_coefs)-1` features and the intercept. We can cross-reference these features with the Hovarth data to compare the features to the Hovarth signature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that cross-validation has selected a value of $\lambda$ resulting in `r length(selected_coefs)-1` features and the intercept. We can compare these features with the features included in the Horvath signature using the Hovarth data:
```

Reviewer 2: Is "by using the Hovarth data" adding anything here?

Reviewer 2: Also if referencing it, I'd suggest clarifying we're not really looking at the data, it's just coefficients from a previous analysis using roughly similar methods

Author: Could remove the Hovarth part if it's not really necessary. Would reduce the length of the lesson slightly also!

Reviewer: I think we could take it out.

Author: Removed in [33d7163](https://github.com/mallewellyn/high-dimensional-stats-r/commit/33d71635d668fbee0a84ed540c69486b90836b94)

Now I'm thinking that we could also remove the heatmap as I'm not sure what this adds/no text following:

https://github.com/mallewellyn/high-dimensional-stats-r/blob/33d71635d668fbee0a84ed540c69486b90836b94/_episodes_rmd/03-regression-regularisation.Rmd#L795-L817
